---
layout: post
title:  "My Crusade for Agility: Part 7"
date:   2010-12-08
---

It has been over a year since I started working at my current employer.  In my
last blog post I published a large list of things that we had started doing in
the past year. We are continuing to advance our technology choices and
development process.


We've been playing with Fabric, which we will most likely use to automate our
production deployment, we have also been messing around with mongo and
mongoengine, which we hope will replace our use of the linux file system for
document storage. We've also been discussing looking more into Celery to use to
do some asynchronous processing. So there are a lot of exciting things on the
horizon from a technology perspective.


We are still trying to figure out how to manage our workflow process. We've been
writing story cards and using a white board to organize what is being worked on,
but we haven't done any sprints or retrospectives. I'm still trying to decide
what we're missing, if we're missing anything at all. I like the idea of having
sprints so we are able to lay out a number of stories that we plan on
implementing within a period of time, but I also like the continuous development
that we are currently doing. Currently, when we finish one story we write another
and get started on that one. The problem that I see with our current process is
there is a lot of room for interruption. Without a fixed roadmap, like one we
would get with sprints, it seems easy to fall into working on tasks that may
satisfy an immediate need but detract from our product's long term goals.


Being able to satisfy immediate needs I think is a very desirable place to be in.
If we could satisfy each customer's immediate needs we would do very well, and
our customers would always be happy. The problem is that every customer's
immediate needs are different. We have to be able to choose the tasks that make
the most sense for our product and will benefit the largest number of customers.
I feel like working in sprints gives us time to reflect on what our customers
seem to be asking for collectively and decide what to deliver to them. Without
sprints, I think that we focus more on greasing the squeaky wheel, which could
easily result in adding features and customizations to our product that may only
make sense for a single customer which may also cost more to implement than the
value added to our product.


In other exciting news, our new floor plan has been completed and construction
has begun. Our new area is going to be a large open room with plenty of wall
space for white boards. I imagine we will have a table in the middle of the room
with pairing stations, but we'll just have to wait and see how exactly that turns
out.


I can't really express in words how proud I am of how far we've come in so little
time. In my humble opinion, I couldn't ask for a better employer or better
co-workers who share my passion for software development and for constantly
improving our development process.
Stay tuned for more, we're always trying to make things better in some way or
another, so I'm sure there will be plenty more to write about.
