---
layout: series
title:  "My Crusade for Agility: Part 10"
date:   2011-10-24
tags: ['agile']
category: agile-crusade
part: 10
---

This is the 10th installment of My Crusade for Agility. I began writing this blog
at the beginning of September 2010 about 9 months after starting to work for my
current employer. The reason I started this whole thing in the first place is
that I saw three things in my new employer: passion, trust and willingness to
change. Passion for software development that my teammates and I share, the trust
of our employer that we will deliver the products that our partners need to succeed
and willingness to change our processes and technology to better help us succeed.

Having said that, willingness to change took time, as did trust. From my
employer's perspective, and my new co-workers, I was this new guy coming in
suggesting a bunch of changes. I had plenty of software development experience,
but not much real experience with the things that I was suggesting, which made it
hard to sell. Test driven development, acceptance test driven development, pair
programming, iterative development, user stories, continuous integration, and so
on. These were all things that I knew about but I had not really done much of any
of them in practice, but I knew people who had. Those people are the ones who
really helped me get things going at my place of work.

I'm proud to say that with the passion of my team members, the trust of our
employer, and everyone's willingness to change we have successfully become an
"agile shop", whatever that means. But then again, who isn't? It seems like
everyone claims to be "agile", but what does that really mean? I don't know, it
depends who you ask. Some people will say that you're "agile" if you do TDD,
others will say that you're "agile" if you work in iterations. Maybe it is both,
maybe neither. What it means to me is exactly the definition of "agile" which is
"ability to move quickly and easily". Adaptive is another word that I think
describes "agile" development very well.

To me, the key concept of agile development is being able to continually meet
changing business needs as quickly as possible or as they occur. Feedback is
important, for software developers and for businesses. Software developers need
to know that they are delivering what the business needs and the business needs
to know that the developers are developing what they need. We all need the same
thing, communication. As early and as often as possible.

As I discussed in my previous post, our communication was not really giving us
feedback as early or as often as we would have liked. We have done a solid job
of using TDD, ATDD, pairing, and CI, but we haven't really been implementing
anything iteratively and getting feedback. This past Monday marked the start of
our first 2 week development sprint. This is hopefully a technique that will
allow us to deliver an amount of work to our partners so we can receive feedback.

At the end of the first week we have completed the development of 31 of the total
39 points included in our sprint. I'm very happy with that and actually extremely
surprised. Not because I didn't think we could do it, but because I was out of
the office one day, I left early another day, we got new computers (so we wasted
at least a day setting up the new hardware), we did a bit of house cleaning
because we have a new team member joining us next week and overall I feel like we
have not done a very good job of sticking to the tasks on the story cards.

Not to say that we've been working on completely random or unrelated things, but
we have definitely gone outside the scope of what we initially set out to
accomplish. While it appears like we are going to get away with it this time,
this is a habit that we will need to break for future sprints. One thing that I
added to our white board is a TODO box. I just started posting things in there
that I come across that are relevant and should be done, but are not necessary to
complete the tasks at hand. My hope is that these tasks will be included in
future sprints.


All in all, the first week has gone very well. With only 8 points left, I think
we will end up making our sprint, which I did not expect for our very first time.
I am on vacation next week, so I will not be around for the tail end, but I'm
sure my team mates will wrap it up nicely.

I will write another follow up once the sprint is complete to fill every one in
with how we ended up.  I also have a few other fun and interesting things to
share, so tune in next time. Hope you've enjoyed my first 10 installments of My
Crusade for Agility.
