---
layout: series
title: "Github Checklists"
category: today-i-learned
tags: ['github']
---

This is not something that I learned today - I am bad at writing about things that I actually learned today - but this is somewhat relevant. Since I have been trying to publish something daily I have been keeping a list of things that I learn and/or use frequently that are worth writing about. I have been pretty happy with what I came up with to manage that process so I thought it would be worth sharing.

I host my blog using [Jekyll][jekyll] and [Github Pages][pages]. Since I am using Github Pages I decided to manage my list of article ideas using Github's issues. I created [an issue][issue] for "Today I Learned Topics" and in that issue I created a checklist of ideas that I can check as I complete each article. The checklist feature is pretty neat. Using the syntax `- [ ] Item to check off` in an issue will render as a checkbox that can be checked by anyone with the commit bit for the repo. I have also been keeping a checklist list of quotes to use at the end of each article in the same issue. 

Once I complete an article (which is typically the day before the actual publish date), I will commit it to a branch and submit a PR to the master branch. Then at some point during the day I will merge the PR and make sure the topic and quote are checked off in the issue.

That is my blogging workflow. It seems to be working for me so far and hopefully it continues to evolve and get better with time.


> The brain is like a muscle. When it is in use we feel very good. Understanding is joyous. - Carl Sagan


[pages]: https://pages.github.com/
[jekyll]: http://jekyllrb.com/
[issue]: https://github.com/mattjmorrison/mattjmorrison.github.io/issues/12
